chapter 1
Nick Carraway introduces himself as a nonjudgmental observer of other people who has recently returned 
to his home in a wealthy Midwestern family from the East Coast after a devastating disappointment. 
This disappointment is the story he is about to tell, which happened two years before.

After graduating from Yale, and fighting in WWI, Nick decides to become a bond trader and moves near 
NYC.

Nick rents a house in West Egg, a Long Island suburb that is less fashionable than East Egg, 
which lies across the Long Island Sound. His tiny, cheap bungalow is next to Gatsby’s enormous, 
tacky mansion.

Nick goes to have dinner with his cousin Daisy and her extremely rich husband Tom Buchanan, 
whom he knows slightly from Yale. Their house is overwhelmingly decorated. Tom is gruff, aggressive, 
and physically intimidating. Daisy and her friend Jordan Baker are wearing white dresses that look 
like balloons in the breeze. Daisy laughs a lot and speaks in a low, extremely appealing voice. 
Their conversation is scattered and shallow, and everyone talks over each other.

During dinner, Tom suddenly reveals himself to be a racist, influenced by a book that argues that the 
“dominant white race” is in danger of being overwhelmed by minorities. The phone rings for Tom. 
After he goes to answer it, Daisy seems upset and leaves the room. Jordan tells Nick that the phone 
call is from Tom’s mistress in New York. The rest of dinner is tense and awkward and makes Nick 
feel like he should call the police.

After dinner, Daisy takes Nick aside and tells him that she has become cynical. Nick asks Daisy 
about her two-year-old daughter. Daisy doesn’t seem to have any maternal feelings. When she found 
out that she had given birth to a daughter, Daisy’s first reaction was to cry. She hopes her daughter 
will grow up to be a “beautiful fool” (1.118). Despite the fact that Daisy seems to be baring her 
soul to him, Nick thinks this display of misery is some kind of an act.


 
Daisy and Nick rejoin Tom and Jordan, and Nick realizes that Jordan is a relatively famous professional
 golfer. He’s seen her in magazines and has heard an unpleasant story about her.

After Jordan goes to bed, Daisy matter-of-factly tells Nick to start a romantic relationship with 
Jordan. Tom, meanwhile, tells Nick not to believe anything Daisy told him when she took him aside. 
Tom and Daisy ask Nick about a rumor that he was engaged. Nick denies it. This rumor is actually 
one of the reasons he has come East